is this wild format sealion logic really
comparable to a huge to find out Ron and
Colleen would have to push Rios
education on to a level that bears more
than a passing resemblance to her own we
wanted to make the experiment a bit more
complex here and see if rather than just
learning to memorize individual rules
between shapes that she was being shown
whether Rio could learn to relate a
large number of individual shapes into
categories the question that this test
raises is does she know that all the
letters relate to each other as do all
the numbers and to help Rio make a
clearer distinction between the two
categories she is a sea lion after all
some of them have extra markings since
there's no object in the center Rio has
to begin by guessing she's gonna have to
just make a choice and you can see it
looks like Rio is choosing a number and
she's being told no so what we're really
interested in seeing is what happens now
on the second trial
on the second trial we see that she goes
straight to the letter being shown and
is rewarded with a piece of fish so on
the next few trials we'll watch to see
whether or not she applies a
problem-solving role to this task that
is based on how all of these objects
she's being shown how they're organized
into different categories this is truly
remarkable
when you consider that Rio has never
explicitly been taught what a letter or
number is she's just deduced that for
herself from the many tests that she's
carried out over the years at this point
it looks like Rio is consistently always
selecting the letter on each trial even
though on each trial the shapes are
different she's worked out that all the
letter trials are correct and you can
see she's earning a fish for each
correct selection she makes of a letter
confident of Rio's ability to use logic
in a very sophisticated fashion to
establish a rule Coleen and Ron
introduced a new element to Rio's
training we had a hypothesis that Rio
had learned to really group these
stimuli into categories so in this task
we're gonna go back to the procedure we
saw earlier what we call a matching to
sample where 3 objects are shown and in
this case the object in the center is
going to be a letter and the two choice
objects are going to be a letter and a
number now real hasn't memorized a rule
here without resorting to trial and
error Rio is able to use her logic to
work out the rule if she sees a number
in the center
she should point to a number if she sees
a letter she should point to a letter
this type of performance really
demonstrated to us that she had really
learned to categorize these shapes in a
way that is very similar to the way that
we might form functional categories of
things in our environment and she was
able to do that without any training at
all